!! NOTE: THIS IS NOT THE FIRMWARE FOR THE GAL ON THE MIXSID ITSELF !!

Regardless of which machine the MixSID is installed to, its own GAL
chip uses the same logic (firmware/mixsid.gal).

The GAL logic in this directory (firmware/c128/u3.gal) is intended to
replace the 74LS138 multiplexer at U3 in a C128 flat case or C128D
plastic case mainboard (Assy. 310378) in order to make the secondary
SID appear at $d500 in stereo addressing mode while in C64 mode.

In more general terms, this modification extends the SID CS signal
created by U3 to additionally cover $D500-$D5FF in C64 mode.

On a plain C64, the SID occupies a large address range from $D400 to
$D7FF. The SID appears mirrored every 32 bytes in this area. This
allows stereo sid boards to simply decode the address for the second
SID based on the mainboards SID CS signal and just two additional
address lines (most likely A5 and A8) in order to further divide this
IO area and to place the second SID at either $D420 or $D500 (the most
common addresses used by stereo tunes).

But on a C128, the SID CS signal is only asserted in the range
$D400-$D4FF in both C128 and C64 mode. This was done because in C128
mode, the MMU appears at $D500 and the VDC appears at $D600. In C64
mode, the MMU is not visible, while the VDC is still visible at
$D600. Because the SID CS signal is never asserted for $D500-$D5FF in
either mode (even though this area is free in C64 mode), a second SID
will simply not appear at $D500 in C64 mode, rendering any common
stereo SID board useless for playing back stereo tunes at $D500 on a
C128 in C64 mode.

Although it would be possible for a stereo SID board to decode the
$d500 area on its own (without relying on the already decoded SID CS
signal), it would be much more complicated and involve additional
address lines for the user to connect.

Therefore the only practival way to get the second SID on $D500 in C64
is to extend the C128 SID CS logic to include $D500-$D5FF with this
little hack.

In order to apply this hack, the 74LS128 on U3 needs to be replaced
with a 16V8 GAL.

First remove the 74LS138 and the ceramic capatitor (C3) above.

Solder in a small 100nF capacitor on the bottom side of the PCB to
replace C3.

Then prepare a 20 pin precision socket by cutting the lower two pins
on both sides so that it can be inserted in place of the 16 pin
74LS138. Also connect Pin 8 of the socket to pin 10 in order to supply
GND to the GAL. It's ok to include pin 9 as well, since it is not
connected in this GAL setup.

Then solder in the socket and add two additional wires on the bottom
side.

Add a wire to connect pin 16 of the GAL to pin 15 of the 8721 (U11).

Add a second wire to connect pin 18 to pin 7 of the GAL. This is
required to get the IO2 signal out at the same place.

Now program and insert the GAL into the socket. If all went well, both
C128 and C64 mode should work as usual. If you have a stereo SID board
installed, configure it to place the second SID at $D500. You should
now be able to play stereo tunes using the second SID at $D500 in C64
mode.


